.. _SelectingPointSets:

Selecting Point Sets |SelectSet|
================================

.. |SelectSet| image:: icons/select-set.png

Thus far, we have explored similarities between ensemble members through their proximity in the abstract space of the 
*Scatterplot*.  However, exploring and comparing temporally changing variables requires comparison of the underlying time 
series data.  DAC does this for small sets of points using plots showing variable values over time to reveal temporal patterns.  

Using the *Scatterplot*, we identify potentially interesting sets of points to view as *Time Series Plots*.  Up to three sets 
of points can be defined at one time.  The points of each set are rendered with color-coded borders (red, blue, and green).  
Points retain their fill color, which encodes a pointâ€™s value for the selected metavariable (see the previous section, 
:ref:`Metadata-Color-Coding`). 

.. figure:: figures/select-red.png
   :scale: 60 %
   :align: center

   **Figure 24: Scatterplot control bar configured to select ensemble members for the red set.**

.. |RedSet| image:: icons/select-red.png

.. |BlueSet| image:: icons/select-blue.png

To select points for the *red* selection, click on the |RedSet| icon, as shown in Figure 24, then select a group of points.  
This places them in the *red* group.  Clicking on the |BlueSet| icon (as shown in Figure 25) places subsequently selected 
points into the *blue* group.  Similarly, points can be selected for the *green* group (as in Figure 26).  Selection actions 
operate only on the group indicated by the currently highlighted (grayed) *set* icon.  Points can be added to a set through 
either a click-and-drag rubber-band operation to encircle points, or through individual point selection.  Although the initial 
point can simply be clicked on, adding additional points requires holding down the shift-key or the control-key while clicking 
or rubber-banding each new point (simply clicking on additional points will not add them to the set).  Clicking on the 
background will clear the current point set.  You can remove subsets of points by either shift- or control-clicking a 
previously selected point, or by holding the shift- or control-key while rubber-banding a subset of previously selected points.  

.. figure:: figures/select-blue.png
   :scale: 60 %
   :align: center

   **Figure 25: Scatterplot control bar configured to select ensemble members for the blue set.**

Selections in the *Scatterplot* are linked to both the *Time Series Plots* (right view) and the *Metadata Table* (bottom left 
view), as shown in Figure 26.  Plots for the selected points are drawn as correspondingly colored lines, while the selected 
table rows are highlighted with matching color-coded backgrounds.  Since the links between the *Scatterplot* and the
*Metadata Table* are bidirectional, selections can also be made by selecting rows in the table (see Table Row Selection). 

.. figure:: figures/temp-vs-precip-mac.png
   :align: center

   **Figure 26: Cities near the extremes of the scatterplot are selected as R, B, and G sets.  Looking at the Metadata Table, we see that the green group consists of hot dry cities, the red group as warm humid cities, and the blue group as colder cities.   Selections are linked between the Scatterplot, Time Series Plots, and Metadata Table views.**

The layout of the points in the *Scatterplot* appears to place hot dry cities in the top right corner, warm humid cities at the 
bottom, and cold wet cities on the left.  Selecting points from each of these groups as our color-coded sets, we can explore 
this hypothesis by identifying the cities in each of the selected sets by scrolling through the *Metadata Table*, as shown in 
Figure 26.  Indeed, the cities in *red* are in Hawaii and Florida, the cities in *green* are in Arizona, and the cities in 
*blue* are in New York and the Midwest.

